Copy for website “Brienna Macnish 2016”

VILLAGE
Junction Festival September 8-11, 2016

VILLAGE is an immersive audio installation created over twelve months in collaboration with the residents of retirement communities in Launceston, Tasmania.

VILLAGE takes you past the manicured lawns and behind the lace curtains to find out what life in a retirement village is really like.

Tasmania’s population is the oldest in Australia and it’s ageing the fastest. While the media shouts in horror about the state’s immanent transformation into a “retirement island” VILLAGE asks, “Would that really be such a bad thing?” VILLAGE sits within a context of significant social change and at its heart the project seeks to foster intergenerational empathy and connection. Through an audio-documentary that shares the stories older people and a series of participatory events that bring a younger audience into the world of retirement village living VILLAGE is a gesture towards how intergenerational connection within our communities might begin.

In conjunction the audio installation two satellite events were run as part of Junction Festival. Let's Talk About Death, was an advanced care directive workshop for all ages produced in collaboration with Palliative Care Tasmania and Common Ground was a intergenerational afternoon tea connecting older and younger female leaders within the local community.

VILLAGE is the second part of a planned trilogy of works that explore ageing in contemporary Australia. The first part of this series, HOME was produced at Next Wave Festival 2014.


The Becalmed Heart 

The Becalmed Heart is a large scale immersive installation that invites audiences to enter a world created from refuse.

Created from over 20,000 plastic grocery bags, The Becalmed Heart is an meditation upon our waste and the impact of human intervention on nature. Inspired by images of vast plastic islands floating across the surface of the ocean and sprawling landfill sites this project attempts to capture the grotesque beauty of devastated landscapes.

The Becalmed Heart transports you to a world formed entirely from plastic, as you explore the dark tunnels and vast fields you find shelters and evidence of a human presence since vanished from the world. As you are drawn further into this eerie landscape  it  is ambiguous whether the plastic has has grown or been constructed, and whether the people whose traces you stumble upon were creators or caretakers. 

The Becalmed Heart was described by Fenella Kernebone as, “…a powerful reflection on consumption…our relationship with nature and the impact of climate change, executed in the most brutally beautiful way.”


The 20,000 plastic bags used in this project are post-consumer waste collected from friends, family and recycling bins. To ensure the bags remain recyclable each of the 20,000 bags has been hand tied together by the artists and a very hard working team of volunteers. At the conclusion of this project we will recycle our 20,000 bags into durable plastic outdoor furniture through our project partner, Replas.


HOME

HOME is a site-specific audio theatre work that invites audiences into the home of a stranger. 

“I always thought I’d go first,” was one of the first things someone said to me when I began asking people what it is like to grow older. Intrigued, I began searching for stories about the people left behind, people alone in houses that once sheltered families. What does it mean for older people to reconsider whether they will be able to maintain their homes and the independence they represent into the future?

HOME invited audiences into a private residence in Kensington. Surrounded by a lifetime of memories, treasured bric-a-brac and chewed dog toys, audience members explored this private world. Listening to an intimate audio story whilst traveling alone through rooms of the house. HOME asked audiences to consider what it means to be the last one left in a house when your children are grown and partner is gone.
 


In Your Own Words

Uncommon Places was a series of public art commissions that formed the keynote project for Melbourne Fringe Festival, 2014. Uncommon Places explored the concept of the Third Place – meaning neither home nor the workplace, but social locations where people gather, converse, catch up and hang out. Third Places stitch the fabric of society together, informal sites that foster civic engagement, political thought, multicultural vibrancy and a sense of belonging.

In Your Own Words by Brienna Macnish is a documentary audio work designed to be listened to in a fast food restaurant in the Melbourne CBD. In Your Own Words looks at Third Places in crisis. Third Places that exist despite corporate efforts to quash them, Third Places that have been eradicated because of prejudice against the groups using them and how one person's social hub can, for another, be the loneliest place in the world.


Stories of the Gem

Stories of the Gem are a series of four short site-specific performance works designed to be performed on The Gem, a dry-docked paddle steamer.

The Fairfax Festival is an annual arts festival for young people living in regional and remote Australia. Through in-community residencies and workshops professional artists work with small groups to create pieces of performance for presentation at a three day festival in Swan Hill.

At the 2014 Fairfax Festival, myself and twenty young people from Barham, New South Wales created four audio works that were performed on The Gem, a dry-docked paddle steamer. The audio stories were based on the true story of the Gem's partial sinking in 1948. The audio pieces were all performed simultaneously and told the story of the disaster from the point of view of a different characters. Audiences listened to the tracks on headphones whilst following the interactive performance around the ship.

The Third Place

The Third Place was commissioned in response to community tensions around the way a group of young people were using public space in Port Noarlunga, South Australia. 

Third places are welcoming and open to anyone and everyone, they are the places we go to meet with the people we know and perhaps with people we don’t. But what happens when individuals or communities don’t have the social, cultural or financial capital to feel comfortable in these third places? What happens when people – especially young people – try and create third places for themselves?

Ramsay Place, known to the young people who hang out there as, "The Green Area" is a outdoor area surrounded by a shopping complex, council offices, a theatre, a TAFE and a number of other small businesses. Between 10 and 40 young people aged between 12 and 25 come to this space between 12pm and 6pm every day to hang out. The Third Place is a site-specific audio documentary created from interviews with these young people completed over the course of a week long residency in February 2016. The work unpacks what The Green Area means to the young people who inhabit it and shares these previously unheard narratives with the local community.

The Third Place will be installed as a permanent public artwork at Ramsey Place in 2017.